# The Computer

You've been the user of many websites, you've even developed a few with HTML &
CSS, but you haven't had to _be the computer_ yet. With HTML & CSS it's enough
to learn what goes in and what comes out, you don't need to know what happens in
between:

- HTML/CSS goes into a browser -> ... ? ... -> a website is displayed

With JavaScript it's the complete opposite. What the program _does_ (inputs ->
outputs) is less important than _how it happens_. Your goal now isn't to amaze
the user, it's to become the computer and understand what happens between the
input and the output:

- source code -> **a lot of important steps** -> final output

## Computer Empathy

A program is just a series of instructions. If you follow the instructions
_exactly_ like the computer would, you are actually running the program by hand!
(just a lot slower.) There is no difference in theory between you following the
code's instructions and a computer following the same instructions.

So when you practice tracing think of it as building your _computer empathy_:
understanding what it's like to be the computer as it runs your program. If the
first rule in design is "know your user", then one of the first rule in coding
should be "know your computer". After all, the computer is one of your code's
users!

## Predict, not Explain

So what does it mean to "know JavaScript"? How do you know when you've
understood some code? When you can **predict** _exactly_ what will happen at
each step of execution!

Explaining a program in plain english is helpful but it's easy to be a little
bit wrong and not know it. When you focus on _predicting_ what happens at each
step and you check your predictions with a trace or JS Tutor, then you really
know if you understood.

This approach is also helpful because not only will you know if you're right,
but if you're wrong the computer will tell you the right answer! Then you know
exactly which line you didn't understand, and you know what to study next.

---

## Programs: The Computer

The computer is in the center of this diagram. It interpreting the developers
source code, processing the user's data, and logging information for the
developer.

Tracing code is a very good way to begin understanding how the computer follows
your instructions one step at a time:

[![program diagram](../../assets/a-program.png)](https://excalidraw.com/#json=_cj6JYwuO38PPGKxXN_cQ,3910Z7e2jGLZu4vjueG-Bg)
